### Make a mouse
USB is kind of complicated. It behaves by giving the computer direct memory access to the Pico.  

DMA is a fancy, high speed copy and paste function. When using DMA, on an interrupt, the contents of a memory address is copied to another memory address. For instance, when a UART character is received, it can be automatically copied into RAM. The address can be automatically incremented, and then another interrupt can fire when the buffer is full. The CPU doesn't have to do anything to read a UART message! But there is no analysis, no way to detect when you get a newline character to know that a message is complete, this required CPU intervention, so every once and a while you need to run through the array to see if you should call scanf(), but at least there are no blocking functions to worry about.  

For USB, the computer is given direct access to the Pico RAM, at an address called an endpoint. The first endpoint contains data that defines what type of USB communication will be used. The Pico can handle [Low and Full speed USB transmission](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB#Connector_type_quick_reference), which sounds impressive but is really just USB1.1, which covers the basic types of communication. These types are HID, CDC, MSD, and music and video streaming.  

For HID and CDC types, the computer will go into the Pico and grab 64 bytes of memory at 1kHz (and also leave 64 bytes), for a transmission of 64k bytes per second per direction. HID devices cover mice, keyboards, and other simple human interfaces, and they don't need drivers! So no special computer code, or driver, is needed, but you must put the data in specific addresses in the 64 bytes for the type of device being used. CDC devices are virtual serial communication ports, and can use standard drivers or brand specific drivers (like FTDI or SiLabs).  

MSD and streaming data work a little differently. A USB bus will get a certain amount of attention from the computer, and talk to each device. The remaining time is given to USB devices that might need to send more data, like MSD or streaming types. 

MSD, CDC and HID devices guarantee the data goes through, streaming devices are allowed to drop bytes.  

All this to say that example code is really important when trying to get USB to work. It will contain lots of headers and functions to set the type of USB.  

Use the example dev_hid_composite. In usb_descriptors.h, change REPORT_ID_MOUSE to 1 so that the Pico will only enumerate as a mouse. Note in usb_descriptors.c there are variables like USB_PID and USB_VID, which can be identified on your computer when the device enumerates. You're supposed to pay for these! A full PID and VID will set you back about $10k, but some companies sell subsets or will let you use their for free as long as you stay under a low number of units.   

In main.c, the function hid_task() eventually calls send_hid_report(). Change this so that the mouse report is sent instead of the keyboard, something like:

```c
send_hid_report(REPORT_ID_MOUSE, btn); // was REPORT_ID_KEYBOARD
```

(In usb_descriptors.h there is an enum for the types of HID devices the Pico could be, don't change this file).  

Here the btn parameter is not used (also, the btn is the state of the bootsel button). 

Compile and load the code. In main.c, note how the LED on GP25 will blink with a rate that depends on the USB status. When it blinks one second on and on second off, the Pico is behaving like a mouse. How else can you tell that the code is working? Where is your mouse cursor??  

A mouse sends a delta X and delta Y command to the computer (usually not every 1 mS, more like at 100 Hz). The deltas are small, like 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 (basically how many pixels to move). Your computer then filters the heck out of this limited data to make the cursor move smoothly, but sometime with crazy amounts of acceleration (looking at you OSX). Each operating system will behave differently with the same code!  

You can see how the mouse will move in case REPORT_ID_MOUSE.  

### Assignment  

Wire up four buttons in a "+" configuration (one for up, one for down, one for left, one for right). Edit the mouse code so that there are two modes:  

* In regular mode, control the mouse with the four buttons (just mouse position, don't worry about clicking). The longer you hold a button, the faster the cursor should move. There are lots of ways to implement this, for example, when a button is pressed, remember what time it is. Every loop, see if the button is still pressed, and how much time has elapsed. The cursor speed will be highly discretized, so set 3 or 4 speed levels based on the elapsed time. 

* In remote working mode, program the mouse to move in a slow circle. Use a fifth button to toggle between modes, and turn on an LED to indicate which mode is currently active. 

The button circuits need a pull up or pull down resistor. You can wire those externally, or use the internal resistor with a function like

```c
gpio_pull_up(PIN_NUM); // after initializing the pin as input
```

Your will probably also need to add the gpio library to the project:
```c
#include "hardware/gpio.h"
```

Record a short video demo, and post your code in a folder called HW11 in your repo.
