Camera

The [OV7670](http://www.voti.nl/docs/OV7670.pdf) is a [CMOS camera sensor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_sensor#CCD_vs._CMOS_sensors) that can output [VGA quality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphics_display_resolution#640_%C3%97_480_(VGA)) images at 30Hz in a variety of formats.  

Let's talk about that data rate for a second. A VGA image is 640 by 480 pixels, for a total of 307,200 pixels. Each pixel can contain an 8 bit value for red, green and blue color, so storing an image would take 921,600 bytes, or 7,372,800 bits. At 30Hz, the data bit rate is 221,184,000 bits per second! If that feels like a lot, do the calculation for a 4k image! Of course there are tricks, like compression, to reduce the amount of data, but obviously we are going to have issues using a camera with a low speed and memory microcontroller like a 48MHz PIC32.  

The RP2350 will be able to do a little better at 150MHz, but still, with only 500k RAM, we can't even store a VGA image. The OV7670 uses an interface called SCCB to initialize the setting of the camera (it is basically I2C). The camera can be setup to output an image as small as 40 by 30 pixels and using [only 16 bits](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YUV) to store all three colors (40 * 30 * 2 = 2400 bytes, much more manageable). The raw data is transmitted over an 8 bit parallel port, plus a few extra pins that tell you when a new image has started and when a new line of an image has started.   

The [OV7670 module](https://www.amazon.com/OV7670-Aideepen-640x480-Compatible-Arduin0/dp/B0CF9QJFQ9/ref=sr_1_2?crid=1DQB9E87P0ZEP&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.AEQ3eaA8uwclVn4xDiVoviYvCRbaLfasbD-N8aT16zWcUpFiFswWdIIFJuckmF81LS0D40wDXBrF_4D5WZVV2tT5s7r_lUW-tHgmWby2CTPi0dtOKmouh34JLRLMyCDnJQvtTNn0xkZcgb2VGHvo2IbSHCWQZHYcS2Qqw7GAFPSDl_BekqsHALKYixkxFBcgEYt4h-Tzs8yYOPgnL-2k_WKU6WUP24vtEFr6lqYnDN4.WhzK2kpf6a9Et0ikoGEekjZTchprUsKbQ7eujBRWszg&dib_tag=se&keywords=ov7670&qid=1745945078&sprefix=ov7670%2Caps%2C98&sr=8-2) I purchased glued the lens in for a fixed focus, and has an unfortunate pinout that cannot be plugged into a breadboard. Use some male-to-female ribbon cable to connect to the Pico, until we get a better PCB in that will make all the connections for us.  

The connections are:
* 3.3V to the Pico 3.3V and GND to the Pico GND
* SCL to the Pico I2C0-SCL/GP15 and SDA to the Pico I2C0-SDA/GP14. (Enable the internal pull up resistors)
* VS to Pico GP8 (this is Vertical Sync)
* HS to Pico GP9 (this is Horizontal Sync)
* PLK to Pico GP11 (this is Pixel Clock)
* MCLK to Pico GP10 (this is Master Clock)
* D0 to Pico GP0
* D1 to Pico GP1
* D2 to Pico GP2
* D3 to Pico GP3
* D4 to Pico GP4
* D5 to Pico GP5
* D6 to Pico GP6
* D7 to Pico GP7 (these are the 8 bit data pins)
* RST to 3.3V
* PWDN to GND

Most of these pins can be changed in code, but it helps if the 8 bit data pins are continuous.  

The Master Clock controls the speed of the OV7670, we use PWM to provide a clock to Master Clock, at least 10MHz (I set it to 25MHz). Too slow and the pixels can't get out fast enough.  

VSynch pulses with each new image. HSynch pulses with each new row of pixels. PCLK pulses with each new pixel. There are extra PCLK to ignore, so you must keep track of how many PCLK to collect after each HSynch, and how many HSynch to collect after each VSynch.  

The pixel data is collected at RGB565, with is 16 bit: 5 red bits, 6 green bits, and 5 blue bits (your eyes are slightly more sensitive to green).  

Interrupts are used to collect the pixel data and keep track of all three pulses.  

After an image is collected at 80x60, the data is converted to colors and printed to the computer. There, a python program reads the data and draws the colors to the screen, either with matplotlib or pygamezero. 

[Code](https://github.com/ndm736/ME433_2025/tree/main/ov7670)   

This code is not yet complete, the colors are wrong and one axis is inverted, but try to wire up the camera using the male-to-female cable and collect an image. I will update the code to full color soon!
